# Instructions for DS009 replication

In this folder, you will find a copy of the data from the DS009 OpenFMRI
dataset:

https://openfmri.org/dataset/ds000009

The version you have here is revision 2.0.3 (see the dataset web page for
details).

The first author of this paper is Jessica Cohen, who is now at the University
of North Carolina:

http://cohenlab.web.unc.edu/

The web page points you to the methods write-up for the study at:

https://openfmri.org/media/ds000009/ds009_methods_0_CchSZHn.pdf

There is a copy of that document in this folder.

The web page also points you to the canonical write-up of this experiment,
which is Cohen's PhD thesis.  You can get that by following the links on the
page, and logging in through your UoB sign-in, but for your convenience, this
folder has a copy at:

jrcohen_dissertation.pdf

The experiment you have here is the one that Cohen describes in chapter 4 of
her thesis. The chapter title is "The neural basis of self-control"; it is on
page 53 as numbered, page 74 in the PDF.  As far as I can see, the methods
document above is a better-quality reproduction of the methods section in
chapter 4 of the thesis. The thesis chapter contains the description of their
FMRI analysis, but we have reproduced that section of the thesis below.

Your job is to reproduce the activation maps for two of the four main effects
of the four tasks, as described in figure 4.5 of the thesis chapter, and
tables 4.2 through 4.3.

The two behavioural tasks, and associated "main effects" are:

* Stop-Signal (SS) task / successful stop - go;
* Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART) / cashing out - inflating the balloon;

You are also welcome to look at the other two tasks, but they need some
statistical techniques that we have not covered in the lectures or practicals:

* Temporal Discounting (TD) task / difficult trials varying parametrically
  with delay;
* Emotion Regulation (ER) task / activity for "suppress negative" trials
  with positive regression against self-reported regulation.

In order to replicate the two main effects (SS and BART), you should repeat
their analysis as exactly as you can, with a few exceptions. 

Below, we have reproduced the FMRI analysis section (4.2.5) from Cohen's
thesis.  You will see the exceptions in our annotations labeled with "FBI
annotation:"

"""
Imaging data were processed and analyzed using FSL 4.1 (FMRIB's Software
Library, www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl). Steps included BET to extract the brain from
the skull and McFLIRT for motion correction. Statistical analysis was
conducted using FEAT 5.98. The statistical models varied depending on the
task. For the SS task, the model included events for successful go
responses, successful stop responses, and unsuccessful stop responses.
Incorrect and missed go trials were included in a nuisance regressor. All
events began at fixation onset and lasted through the duration of the stimulus
(1.5 seconds). For the BART, the model included events for inflating the
balloon (all but the last inflation of each trial), the last inflation before
an explosion, cashing out, and a balloon explosion. The three response-related
events began at stimulus onset and lasted the duration of the participant's
RT. The explosion event began at the time of the explosion and lasted the
amount of time the exploded balloon was on the screen (2 seconds).
"""

FBI annotation: the following description is for tasks you do not need to
analysis for this assessment.

"""
For the temporal discounting task, the model included events for trials predefined as
hard choices and trials predefined as easy choices. It also included
parametric regressors weighting each of those trial types by delay. All events
began at stimulus onset. The duration of all events was the participant's RT
on that trial. Nuisance regressors included trials with no response (duration
4.5 seconds) and the remainder of each trial itself after a decision had been
made (4.5 seconds - RT). For the emotion regulation task, the model included
events for viewing the attend instructions, viewing the suppress instructions,
viewing the three different image types (attend neutral, attend negative, and
suppress negative), viewing the rating screen, and a de-meaned parametric
regressor weighted by the participant's response. All events began at stimulus
onset and lasted either the duration of the stimulus (1 second for
instructions, 5 seconds for images) or the participant's RT (viewing the
rating screen and the parametric regressor of the participant's rating).
Missed rating trials were included in a nuisance regressor with a duration of
3 seconds. For the image regressors, only images rated as 1-3 (all neutral
images) or 5-7 (all negative images) were included. Three participants had
less than two instances of at least one of the events and were therefore
excluded from the analysis.
"""

FBI annotation: the following applies to all four tasks, and therefore to the two
tasks in this assessment.

"""
For the first level analysis, images were spatially smoothed using a Gaussian
kernel of FWHM 5 mm. Time-series statistical analysis was carried out using
FILM (FMRIBs Improved Linear Model) with local autocorrelation correction
after highpass temporal filtering (Gaussian-weighted least-squares straight
line fitting with sigma = 33.0s). Regressors of interest were created by
convolving a delta function representing each event of interest with a
canonical (double- gamma) hemodynamic response function (Woolrich et al.,
2001). Parametric regressors were created by modulating the amplitude of a
delta function using a demeaned version of the parameter of interest. In
addition to regressors of interest, estimated motion parameters and their
temporal derivatives (i.e., dis- placement) were included as nuisance
regressors. Linear contrasts were performed for comparisons of interest.

A 3-step registration process was applied using FSL's FNIRT module for
nonlinear registration. EPI functional images were first registered linearly
to an inplane T2-weighted structural image (matched bandwidth; 7 DOF). The
inplane structural image was registered linearly to the high-resolution
structural image (MPRage; 7 DOF), and the high-resolution image was registered
to standard MNI152 space using nonlinear registration with 12 degrees of
freedom (warp resolution 10 mm). These transformation matrices were combined
to provide the transform from EPI to MNI space, and this transform was applied
to the results from the first-level analysis.

For the two tasks that had more than one run (SS and ER), data were com- bined
across the two runs using a fixed effects model, and then modeled using mixed
effects at the group level with FSL's FLAME model (Stage 1 only). The model
for each task included a regressor modeling mean activity and demeaned
regressors for SSRT (SS), number of pumps (BART), k (TD), and amount of
reported regulation (ER). Outlier deweighting was performed using a mixture
modeling approach (Woolrich, 2008). Results were thresholded at a whole-brain
level using cluster-based Gaussian random field theory, with a cluster-forming
threshold of z > 2.3 and a whole-brain corrected cluster significance level of
p < .05 unless otherwise noted in the text. Results of the ROI analysis were
thresholded within that ROI using a threshold-free cluster enhancement method
(TFCE; S. M. Smith & Nichols, 2009) and a corrected significance level of p
<.05 unless otherwise noted. The conjunction analysis found areas that were
significantly active within that ROI for at least two of the tasks. Cortical
surface renderings were performed using CARET software
(http://brainmap.wustl.edu). Group statistical maps were mapped to the
Population Average Landmark and Surface-based (PALS) atlas using the
multifiducial mapping technique described by Van Essen (Van Essen, 2005). For
the purposes of presentation, data are overlaid on the average atlas surface.

